.TH LSMLNZ l ANPROD
.SH NAME
lsmlnz - mixed model least squares and maximum likelihood program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.RS 3
\fBlsmlnz datafile tmpfilea tmpfileb [Pfile Gfile Efile] <fin >fout\fR
\fB                                  [Bfile Wfile]                 \fR
\fB                                  [Rfile]
.RE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I Lsmlnz
is the same as
.I lsmlce
except that variance components which go negative are not set to zero.
.PP
In the following description the term "card" is purely a hangover from
days gone by - it refers of course to an 80-character card image.
.PP
.I Lsmlnz
is a CHARM-compatible implementation of the mixed model least squares and maximum likelihood program 
.I lsmlmw
written by W. R. Harvey of Ohio State University.
.I Lsmlnz
has its dimensions extended to deal with more RHM and LHM than the
standard version.
The current limits are 200 LHM and 200 RHM simultaneously.
.I Lsmlnz
also computes standard errors for phenotypic and environmental
correlations.
.I Lsmlnz
allows (insists on) free format parameter cards.
.I Lsmlnz
allows 
.I matrix
output of genetic parameter estimates or covariance matrices
(see /usr/man/manl/matrix).
.PP
.I Lsmlnz
is documented by 'Users Guide for LSML76'
and by 'Users Guide For LSMLMW'.
The program PARMCARD referred to in the latter guide is not used by
.I lsmlnz
but is available via the standard implementation, 
.I lsmlmw.
.
Therefore you must run 
.I lsmlnz
directly from its parameter cards as was the 
case with the previous version LSML76.
.PP
The parameter cards are as in the LSML76 Guide,
(but see "BUGS" section below) with several exceptions.
For
.I lsmlnz
all parameter cards are in free format.
This means all fields must be present and be separated by blanks.
Character strings (title,effect names,rhm names,etc) must be
enclosed in single quotes.
 Make the following changes to the LSML76 guide to suit
.I lsmlnz:-
.TP 13
.BI "page 13 add the following"
.TP 15
.BI "PRBMIN 54-58"
(f5.4)
.TP 15
.BI "LPARM 59-60"
Parameter cards listing option 0=nolist 1=list.
.TP 15
.BI "NTITL 61-62"
Number of lines of title cards (0-5).
Title cards if present must follow this card.
.TP 15
.BI "NSAVE 63-64"
Save option for genetic parameters or covariances.
for use with 'matrix' routines.
.PP
1 = P,G,E covariance matrices.
.PP
2 = Rp,Rg,Re correlations, phenotypic variance on diagonal
    of Rp matrix, heritability on diagonal of Rg matrix,
    and e**2 on diagonal of Re matrix.
    File names are parameters 4,5,6 on command line.
    Files are written in 'unix' matrix format (-u).
.PP
3 = Between & Within covariance matrices (for random effect)
    File names are parameters 4,5 on command line
    Files are written in 'blocked' matrix format (-b).
.PP
4 = Residual covariance matrix.
    File name is parameter 4 on command line
    File written in 'unix' matrix format (-u).

.TP 13
.BI "page 21-22 change the following columns"
.TP 15
.BI "XM 14-28"
An approximate mean for X punched in E15.8 format.
.TP 15
.BI "LITR 29-34"
Six character literal to describe this regression effect.
.TP 15
.BI "ICLR 35-36"
Number of sets of individual class regressions.
.TP 15
.BI "LAD 37-38"
Punch 01 if class means are to be adjusted to
the approximate mean given for this X.
Punch 03 .....
.TP 15
.BI "IRM(I) 39-40"
Punch the main or nested effects number ......
.TP 13
.BI "page 22 change the following columns"
.TP 15
.BI "YM 10-24"
Approximate mean for Y in e15.8 format.
.TP 15
.BI "LITY 25-30"
Six character literal to describe this dependent variable.
.TP 13
.BI "page 23 change the following columns"
.TP 15
.BI "I309 7"
Punch 00 if use is not to be made of variance & covariance
component estimates ..........
.TP 15
.BI "NR1 8-10"
Punch the percent of the genic variance expected in the "between family"
variance component.....
.TP 13
.BI "page 22-23 change the following"
.TP 15
.BI "ERR T 14-15"
Error term to use in calculating standard error (1,2, or 3)
.TP 15
.BI "NO. 16-17"
Punch the number of constants ....
.TP 15
.BI "R(1) 21-22"
Coded row number in the LS matrix for first constant
.TP 15
.BI "C(1) 23-30"
Coefficient for the R(1) constant in f8.3 format
.TP 15
.BI "R(2) 31-32"
Coded row number for the second constant.
.TP 15
.BI "C(2) 33-40"
Coefficient for the R(2) constant.


.SH EXAMPLES
There is a demonstration shellscript in
\fB/usr/local/src/Harvey/Lsmlmw/version.de/Lsmlnz/Test/harv.p103.scr\fr
The location of this script is applicable to anprod - check with
your own system people for its location in other installations.
.PP
In the synopsis above fin is the input file containing parameter
cards, fout is the output listing, and datafile is the data in CHARM file
format,tmpfilea & tmpfileb are scratch files. Pfile, Gfile
and Efile are save files (in 'unix' matrix format) 
for genetic parameters (under save options 1 or 2),
Bfile and Wfile are save files (in 'blocked' matrix format) for between
and within random effect covariance matrices (under save option 3), and
Rfile is save file (in 'unix' matrix format) for residual covariance
matrix (under save option 4).
Scratch files are normally placed in /tmp and removed at end of job.
The redirection of input & output will of course be different in
a shellscript from in the above synopsis.

.SH SEE ALSO
reg(l),charm/create(l), lsmlmw(l), lsmlch(l),matrix/intro(l)
.SH AUTHORS
W.R.Harvey, Ohio State University.- version.ibm - fortran 66
N.Jackson & R.Evans, Csiro Div Animal Production - version.de - fortran 77
.SH BUGS
For model types 6 & 7 an extra run is performed, not documented in the 
User Guides mentioned above. See User Guide for PC version for correct
documentation of model types 6 & 7.
For details on parameter cards necessary for this run,
see Neville Jackson or Rod Evans (at host 'anprod').
