.TH LSMLCH l ANPROD
.SH NAME
lsmlch - mixed model least squares and maximum likelihood program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.RS 5
\fBlsmlch datafile scratchfilea scratchfileb <fin >fout\fR
.RE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
In the following description the term "card" is purely a hangover from
days gone by - it refers of course to an 80-character card image.
.PP
.I Lsmlch
is a CHARM-compatible implementation of the mixed model least squares and maximum likelihood program 
.I lsmlmw
written by W. R. Harvey of Ohio State University.
.I Lsmlch
is documented by 'Users Guide for LSML76'
and by 'Users Guide For LSMLMW'.
The program PARMCARD referred to in the latter guide is not used by
.I lsmlch
but is available via the standard implementation, 
.I lsmlmw.
.
Therefore you must run 
.I lsmlch
directly from its parameter cards as was the 
case with the previous version LSML76.
.PP
The parameter cards are as in the LSML76 Guide, (but see "BUGS" section below) with several exceptions.  Make the following changes to the LSML76 guide to suit
.I lsmlch:-
.TP 13
.BI "page 13 add the following"
.TP 15
.BI "PRBMIN 54-58"
(f5.4)
.TP 15
.BI "LPARM 59-60"
Parameter cards listing option 0=nolist 1=list.
.TP 15
.BI "NTITL 61-62"
Number of lines of title cards (0-5).
Title cards if present must follow this card.
.TP 13
.BI "page 21-22 change the following columns"
.TP 15
.BI "XM 14-28"
An approximate mean for X punched in E15.8 format.
.TP 15
.BI "LITR 29-34"
Six character literal to describe this regression effect.
.TP 15
.BI "ICLR 35-36"
Number of sets of individual class regressions.
.TP 15
.BI "LAD 37-38"
Punch 01 if class means are to be adjusted to
the approximate mean given for this X.
Punch 03 .....
.TP 15
.BI "IRM(I) 39-40"
Punch the main or nested effects number ......
.TP 13
.BI "page 22 change the following columns"
.TP 15
.BI "YM 10-24"
Approximate mean for Y in e15.8 format.
.TP 15
.BI "LITY 25-30"
Six character literal to describe this dependent variable.
.TP 13
.BI "page 23 change the following columns"
.TP 15
.BI "I309 7"
Punch 00 if use is not to be made of variance & covariance
component estimates ..........
.TP 15
.BI "NR1 8-10"
Punch the percent of the genic variance expected in the "between family"
variance component.....
.TP 13
.BI "page 22-23 change the following"
.TP 15
.BI "ERR T 14-15"
Error term to use in calculating standard error (1,2, or 3)
.TP 15
.BI "NO. 16-17"
Punch the number of constants ....
.TP 15
.BI "R(1) 21-22"
Coded row number in the LS matrix for first constant
.TP 15
.BI "C(1) 23-30"
Coefficient for the R(1) constant in f8.3 format
.TP 15
.BI "R(2) 31-32"
Coded row number for the second constant.
.TP 15
.BI "C(2) 33-40"
Coefficient for the R(2) constant.


.SH EXAMPLES
There is a demonstration shellscript in
\fB/usr/local/src/Harvey/Lsmlmw/version.de/lmw/Test/harv.scr\fr
The location of this script is applicable to anprod - check with
your own system people for its location in other installations.
.PP
In the synopsis above fin is the input file containing parameter
cards, fout is the output listing, and datafile is the data in CHARM file
format.
The redirection of input & output will of course be different in
a shellscript from in the above synopsis.

.SH SEE ALSO
reg(l),charm/create(l), lsmlmw(l)
.SH AUTHORS
W.R.Harvey, Ohio State University.- version.ibm - fortran 66
N.Jackson, csiro div animal production - version.de - fortran 77
.SH BUGS
For model types 6 & 7 an extra run is performed, not documented in the User Guides mentioned above. For details on parameter cards necessary for this run, see Neville Jackson or Rod Evans (at host 'anprod').
